Redefine consistency and update examples (#28)
chris-wood/key-consistency: draft-ietf-privacypass-key-consistency.md

This document defines the following terms:

Reliant System:
: A system that embeds one or more key consistency systems.

Key:
: A cryptographic object used by a reliant system.

Key Identifier (Key ID):
: A unique identifier for a key.

Key Set:
: A set of one or more keys.

Key Set Identifier (Set ID):
: A unique identifier for a key set.

Client:
: An entity that uses a key in a reliant system.

Source:
: An entity that provides key material for use by clients.

The key consistency model is dependent on the implementation and reliant system's threat model.

# Consistency Requirements {#reqs}

Privacy-focused protocols which rely on widely shared public keys typically
require keys be consistent. Informally, key consistency is the
requirement that all clients who use a source-provided key in some reliant system
share the same view of the key. Some protocols depend on large sets of clients
with consistent keys for privacy reasons. Specifically, all clients with a

> consistent key represent an anonymity set wherein each client of the key in

Reviewer: Are we selling this short by not mentioning the set of configuration items as a whole?  OHTTP is careful to note that privacy depends on consistency of not just the key, but the entire  client configuration, of which the key is a part.

The key might be central, but how it is identified and how the protocol is executed are details that could expose clients.

Author: Yeah, our collective thinking has evolved from keys to configurations. We can address this separately.

Author: Filed #31 to track.

that set is indistinguishable from the rest. An attacker that can actively
cause inconsistent views of keys can therefore compromise client privacy.

## Consistency Definitions

Formally, consistency is a predicate defined based on key sets. Typically, clients
try to assess consistency of one key against one or more keys, but there are
no restrictions on whether the clients holding those keys are the same.

There are two different predicates for consistency, defined below.

- Consistency: Two key sets with the same set ID are consistent if and only if (iff) the intersection
  of key IDs for each set is non-empty.
- Global consistency: A key set is globally consistent iff, for all key sets with the

>   same set ID, the intersection between each set of key IDs and each other set is non-empty.

Reviewer: I'm not 100% on this definition.  Two concerns:

1. This focuses on identifiers, but we know that one identifier can reasonably identify multiple keys.
2. The intersection text is strange.  If keys sets overlap, that doesn't guarantee that users of those key sets will choose to exercise overlapping portions.  (You talk about this below as having unions that are consistent, but this is not the thing I would seek to emphasize.)

Author: I think the intersection point is good. As a counter example, consider the following:

- Cache gets key set {K1, K2}
- Client C1 gets key K1
- Client C2 gets key K2
- Client C1 and C2 would conclude consistent if they checked against the cache, but they're using inconsistent keys

I'm going to make this emphasize exact equality instead.

with two key sets can verify (global) consistency without requiring knowledge of a
cryptographic secret.

Reliant systems must also consider agility when trying to achieve consistency. A naive solution to
ensuring consistent keys is to only use a single, fixed key pair for the entirety of the system.
Clients can then embed this key into software or elsewhere as needed, without any additional
mechanics or controls to ensure that other clients have a different key. However, this solution clearly
is not viable in practice. If the corresponding key is compromised, the system fails. Rotation must
therefore be supported, and in doing so, clients need some mechanism to ensure that newly rotated
keys are consistent.

Operationally, servers rotating keys may likely need to accommodate distributed system
state-synchronization issues without sacrificing availability. Some systems and protocols
may choose to prioritize strong consistency over availability, but this document assumes
that availability is preferred to total consistency.

# Consistency Mechanisms

There are a variety of ways in which reliant systems may build key consistency solutions,

> ranging in operational complexity to ease-of-implementation. In this section, we survey

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with different trade-offs for operational and implementation complexity. In this section, we survey
```

a number of possible solutions. The viability of each varies depending on the applicable
threat model, external dependencies, and overall reliant system's requirements.

In each mechanism, the client has as input a candidate key and seeks to determine

> if it has a (globally) consistent version of the key.

Reviewer: Is this the function we want to provide, or is it a part of the key acquisition process instead "get_key(..., consistent=true)" ?

I tend to think that an adjunct process is a building block of the acquisition process.  That is, you can take "get_key(..., consistent=false)" and add "is_consistent(k)" to upgrade the acquisition process, but that is not the only way to achieve a consistent outcome.

As the emphasis below is on acquisition, it would seem like the "get_key" approach is a better fit for this document, at least.

Author: I view this document as providing guidance for implementing "is_consistent(k)", since getting a key tends to be a protocol and deployment specific process. The emphasis on acquisition mainly exists because one would presumably want to run this check immediately after acquiring a key, not _during_ the process of getting the key. I'll make some changes to reflect this.

In particular, a system needs to ensure that a server cannot rotate its keys too often in order
to divide clients into smaller groups based on when keys are acquired. Such considerations are
already highlighted within the Privacy Pass ecosystem, more discussion can be found in {{PRIVACY-PASS-ARCH}}.
Setting a minimum validity period limits the ability of a server to rotate keys, but also
limits the rate of key rotation.

Querying a cache for its stored copy of a key leaks information to that cache.
There are several mitigations for this leak. For example, clients could obtain the
contents of a cache and query it locally. Alternatively, clients could remotely query
the cache using privacy-preserving queries (e.g., a private information retrieval (PIR)
protocol). In the case where the cache is downloaded locally, it should be considered
stale and re-fetched periodically. The frequency of such updates can likely be infrequent
in practice, as frequent key updates or rotations may affect privacy. Downloading the
entire cache works best if there are a small number of entries, as it does not otherwise
impose bandwidth costs on each client that may be impractical.

> If this cache is trusted, then all clients which request a key from this server are

Reviewer: "is trusted" is too direct and absolute.  Clients don't need to unconditionally trust a cache, they only have to have some expectation that it not collude with the provider of the key/configuration to unmask clients.  That is, the cache is entrusted with the responsibility not to take deliberate action that would compromise client security.  It helps a little that operating honestly is cheaper than otherwise, but this trust element still exists.

assured they have a consistent view of the server key compared to all other clients of

> the cache. If this cache is not trusted, operational risks may arise:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the cache. A malicious cache can introduce the following threats:
```

|          |           |
+----------+           |
                       v
+----------+         +-----------+       +----------+
|          |         |           |       |          |
|  Client  +-------->+   Cache   +------>+  Server  |
|          |         |           |       |          |
|          |         +-----------+       |          |
|          |                             |          |
|          |         +-----------+       |          |
|          |         |           |       |          |
|          +============ Proxy  ========>+          |
|          |         |           |       |          |
+----------+         +-+---------+       +----------+
      x                ^
      x                |
+----------+           |
|          |           |
|  Client  +-----------+
|          |
+----------+
~~~
{: #fig-disc-shared-proxy title="Shared Proxy with Confirmation Discovery Example"}

Ideally, clients confirm with the server via some anonymizing proxy. Examples of proxies
include anonymous systems such as Tor. Tor proxies are general purpose and operate
at a lower layer, on arbitrary communication flows, and therefore they are oblivious

> to clients fetching keys. A large set of untrusted proxies that are aware of key fetch

Reviewer: "large" is an odd word to use here without explanation.

Author: Agreed -- dropped the word altogether.

requests ({{cache-based}}) may be used in a similar way. Depending on how clients
fetch such keys from servers, it may become more difficult for servers to uniquely
target individual clients with unique keys without detection. This is especially true
as the number of clients of these anonymity networks increases. However, beyond

> Tor, there does not exist a special-purpose anonymity network for this purpose.

Reviewer: I think that this emphasis on Tor as a public utility is a little off.  I'd prefer to see this mention VPNs, proxies, MASQUE, and other things as options, noting that most of these tend to insist on payment for access.

Author: Filed #29 to track this.

  may impede deployment in practice. Experience with Certificate Transparency shows
  that most implementations have chosen not to check SignedCertificateTimestamps before
  using (that is, accepting as valid) a corresponding TLS certificate.

- A consensus-based log whose assertions are created by a coalition of entities that periodically agree on
  the correct binding of server names and key material. In this model the agreement is achieved via a consensus
  protocol, but the specific consensus protocol is dependent on the implementation.

## Key Limits

Consistency may also be improved by forcibly limiting the number of keys that an attacker can feasibly
use for targeting particular clients. One way to implement this limit is via key-based encryption,
which is a procedure where a client encrypt the information that it sends to a server, such as a token
or signed object generated with the server keys. This encryption uses a key derived from the key
configuration, specifically not including any form of key identifier along with the encrypted
information. If key derivation for the encryption uses a pre-image resistant function (like HKDF),

> the server can only decrypt the information if it knows the key configuration. As there is no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the server can only decrypt the information only if it either knows the key configuration or can guess it. As there is no
```
